Introduction to
A company built on search
Our mission
Google’s mission is to organize
the world’s information and
make it universally accessible
and useful. As a first step to
fulfilling this mission, Google’s
founders Larry Page and
Sergey Brin developed a new
approach to online search that
took root in a Stanford
University dorm room and quickly spread to information seekers around the globe.
The Google search engine is an easy-to-use, free service that consistently returns relevant results in a
fraction of a second.
What we do
Google is more than a search engine. We also offer Gmail, maps, personal blogging, and web-based
word processing products to name just a few. YouTube, the popular online video service, is part of
Google as well.
Most of Google’s services are free, so how do we make
money? Much of Google’s revenue comes through our
AdWords advertising program, which allows businesses to
place small “sponsored links” alongside our search
results. Prices for these ads are set by competitive
auctions for every search term where advertisers want their
ads to appear. We don’t sell placement in the search
results themselves, or allow people to pay for a higher
ranking there.
In addition, website managers and publishers take
advantage of our AdSense advertising program to deliver
ads on their sites. This program generates billions of
dollars in revenue each year for hundreds of thousands of
websites, and is a major source of funding for the free content available across the web.
Google also offers enterprise versions of our consumer products for businesses, organizations, and
government entities. These productivity tools include email, search, and geospatial products.
As of December 31, 2008, Google employed 20,222 people full-time, more than two thirds of whom
work across our more than 20 U.S. locations.
Driving economic growth
Google products and online advertising offerings create economic opportunity
for businesses large and small.
AdWords
It’s generally understood that Google’s free products like search,
Gmail, and many others are supported by advertising. What is not
as well known is that, in addition to providing useful products to
our users, Google is a platform for and a partner to American
businesses of all sizes.
Google AdWords enables small businesses of all kinds to place ads for their products and services next
to Google search results, giving them access to millions of our users around the world. Small
businesses can set their own ad budgets and can arrange to pay only when users click on an ad. As a
result, these businesses are able to find and connect with new customers more efficiently and costeffectively.
Google’s ad prices are set by competitive auction, ensuring that prices are always fair and driven by
customers – not set by Google.
AdSense
Google AdSense allows entrepreneurs, educators,
bloggers, and many others to generate revenue by
placing relevant advertising on their websites. In
many cases, these individuals are able to dedicate
themselves full-time to their publications because of
the support they receive from our advertising
programs.
The impact of Google’s technology on the small
business economy is significant. In 2008, we paid a
total of $5.28 billion to AdSense partners who use
our ads to earn money from their websites.
Supporting content owners
Google collaborates with hundreds of content owners to make their
content available online and monetize it in new ways. On
YouTube and Google Book Search, we not only give rightsholders a
way to control access to their works, but also provide them with
tools to reach and profit from a wide audience.
Promoting innovation and competition
Google products are built on the principle of openness and are designed to
foster innovation and creativity across the web.
Giving users control over their data
We think users should have the ability to move their personal data
to competing services, and we provide data export tools in most of
our products to avoid trapping users. From Gmail and Google
Reader, to Search History and Google Docs, we allow users to
export their data, using open formats, to other programs. We
strive to earn our users’ loyalty by building good products and
constantly improving them, not by locking in users artificially.
Google welcomes competition because it stimulates innovation, makes us all work harder, and provides
users with more choice.
Android
Android is the first truly open and comprehensive platform for mobile
devices. It includes an operating system, user-interface, and
applications – all of the software to run a mobile phone, but without
the proprietary obstacles that have hindered mobile innovation. We
developed Android in cooperation with the Open Handset Alliance,
which consists of more than 30 technology and mobile leaders
including Motorola, Qualcomm, HTC and T-Mobile. Through
partnerships with carriers, device manufacturers, developers, and
others, we hope to enable an open ecosystem for the mobile world by
creating a standard, open mobile software platform. We think the
result will ultimately lead to a better and faster pace for innovation
that will give mobile customers unforeseen applications and capabilities. The first Android offering, TMobile’s G-1 device, is currently on the market.
Chrome
Chrome, Google’s open source web browser, was designed to create a
better web experience for users around the world. Available in beta in
more than 40 languages, Google Chrome is a new approach to the
browser that’s based on the simplicity and power needed to run the web
applications of tomorrow. To further advance the openness of the web,
Google Chrome was released as an open source project. The intent is to
make future browsers better by contributing the underlying technology in
Google Chrome to the market, while continuing to develop additional
features.
Increasing productivity and efficiency
Cloud computing products like Google Apps are helping government,
businesses, and organizations save money and collaborate more effectively.
Cloud Computing 101
Cloud computing applications allow users and
organizations to host their files and applications
remotely in managed datacenters and access them
over the Internet. This means that users can reach
their email, documents, photos, and calendar from
wherever they are and from whatever device they
are using.
“The cloud” allows users to collaborate on
documents in real time, save their data on secure
servers instead of vulnerable personal devices, and
access their information wherever they are. Cloud
computing also saves money. Reducing traditional
costs and labor associated with deploying,
maintaining, and upgrading business technology,
IT departments are increasingly becoming free to
devote their limited resources to projects more
strategic to their business.
Google Apps
The Google Apps suite provides organizations,
businesses, and home users with web-based
email, word processing, spreadsheets, calendar,
and more. As maintaining user trust is core to
our business, Google goes to great lengths to
protect the data and intellectual property on
servers that host user data. These facilities are
protected around the clock and we have a
dedicated security operations team who focuses
specifically on maintaining the security of our
environment. The controls, processes, and
policies that protect these data have successfully
completed an independent audit.
Promoting government openness
From Congressional YouTube channels to polling place locators, Google
products are making government more transparent and responsive.
We’re working hard to strengthen democracy and informed participation in the political process by
equipping voters with useful information and helping policymakers and organizations use online tools
to reach citizens. We believe more information means more choice, more freedom, and ultimately more
power for people – and that’s what our mission is all about.
Tools for voters and campaigns
Our YouChoose ’08 site helped candidates use video to
communicate directly with voters through personalized YouTube
campaign channels. YouTube also hosted two presidential primary
debates with CNN, primary campaign trail and conventions video
projects, candidate spotlights, and an election day transparency
initiative with PBS.
Google worked with election officials to centralize official voting
information online and allowed voters to find their polling place,
registration information, and more with a simple one-box search.
Empowering government participation
The 2008 elections demonstrated how Internet technology can increase political participation. Now
Google is empowering citizens and their government officials to use this technology to make
government more open, accountable, and participatory.
For the first time ever, the President is posting his weekly national address on YouTube. Congressional
YouTube channels allow Members to communicate with their constituents in a whole new way. And
President Obama is using Google Moderator on whitehouse.gov to field and respond directly to
questions from people from across the country.
Google wants to help government agencies
make their data accessible to the public. We
have been working with government agencies
to implement the Sitemaps protocol, which
makes it easy for webmasters to make their
public pages searchable by all search
engines. Recently the state governments of
Arizona, California, Utah, and Virginia all implemented Sitemaps.
Protecting user privacy and safety
User privacy and safety are fundamental to every one of our products.
Privacy is important to our users and to our business
Privacy is fundamental to Google’s business. We know that if we lose our users’ trust, our competition
is only one click away. To ensure that privacy is a focus for everyone working on our products, Google
takes a holistic approach to privacy in which every Googler — from engineer to executive — is
responsible for protecting our users’ privacy. As a result, effective privacy policies and features are
built into our products according to three global
design principles: transparency, choice, and
security.
To ensure transparency, we provide layered privacy policy formats, clear and timely notices and privacy
options written in plain language, and videos for users describing our privacy features and policies. To
promote user choice, we provide granular and meaningful privacy options. And to secure our users’
data, we have in place state-of-the-art security and dedicated security teams.
We make sure that our information practices are user-centric, and that our products put our users in
control of their information. In fact, most of our products — including Google search — can be
personalized by registering for a Google account but can also be used without registration. We also
ensure strong restrictions on the transfer of personal information to third parties to further protect our
users’ privacy interests.
For more information about Google’s approach to privacy, please visit our Privacy Center, which is one
click away from the Google.com homepage.
Keeping families safe online
Google is deeply committed to protecting children on the Internet and to
providing all of our users with a safe experience. Our approach has three
primary elements: (1) powerful tools to empower families to control their
activity online; (2) cooperation with law enforcement and industry partners to stop illegal content and
activity online; and (3) educational efforts to increase awareness about online safety. Using this
approach we do the following and much more:
• Provide parents with SafeSearch features, employ digital hashing technologies on YouTube, and
build products that empower the community to report inappropriate content and behavior
• Cooperate with local and federal child safety investigations with a legal team devoted to these
efforts 24 hours a day, 7 days a week
• Quickly remove child pornography and report it to the National Center for Missing and Exploited
Children (NCMEC), and provide hardware and software to NCMEC to improve their ability to
manage incoming reports
• Work with several non-profit organizations including NCMEC, ConnectSafely.org, Common Sense
Media, iKeepSafe, and Net Family News to provide online public service announcements that
promote access to resources about Internet safety
Searching for solutions at Google.org
Google.org uses the power of information and technology to address the global
challenges of our age.
In 2004, when Google founders Larry Page and Sergey Brin wrote to prospective shareholders about
their vision for the company, they outlined a commitment to contribute significant resources, including
1% of Google’s equity and profits in some form, as well as employee time, to address some of the
world’s most urgent problems. That commitment became Google.org. Google.org works closely with a
broad range of “Googlers” on projects that make the most of Google’s strengths in technology and
information. Google also established the Google Foundation in 2005, which is a separate 501(c)(3)
private foundation. The Google Foundation is managed by Google.org and supports our mission and
core initiatives as one of our sources of funds for grant making.
Plugging into a smarter, greener grid
Google engineers are developing free software called Google PowerMeter that
when supplied with energy consumption information from a smart meter, or a
consumer-installed home energy management device, will empower consumers
to understand and make informed decisions about their electricity use. Our
Renewable Energy Cheaper than Coal (RE<C) project is working to develop
electricity from renewable energy sources that is cheaper than electricity
produced from coal. The goal is to produce one gigawatt of renewable energy
capacity – enough renewable energy to power a city the size of San Francisco
– in years, not decades. As part of this effort, Google.org is making strategic
investments and grants, advancing key public policies, and has an internal
engineering team working on developing renewable energy technologies.
Predict and Prevent
Rapid ecological and social changes are increasing the risk of
emerging threats, from infectious diseases to drought and other
environmental disasters. Google.org uses information and technology
to help predict and prevent emerging threats – such as infectious
disease outbreaks – before they become local or global crises. We
support efforts to identify hot spots where diseases may emerge,
detect new pathogens and outbreaks earlier, and respond quickly.
Inform and Empower
Google.org believes that providing meaningful, easily accessible information to citizens and
communities, service providers, and policymakers is a key part of creating home-grown solutions to
improve the quality of public services. Better information can help governments and other providers
spend scarce resources wisely. And, empowered by information, citizens and communities can demand
better services from providers or develop new solutions to meet their own needs. We will work with
public, private, and civil society partners to address each side of this problem.